Hello and welcome to the next work for example.
You were going to take a look at how to create this volumetric fire
that is also animated as you can see
and the note graph of this is considerably smaller
than the ones we have talked about before.
So this video is going to be quite a bit shorter but in comparison
to the previous shade is that we talked about the work for examples.
This one is actually animated and volumetric.
So these two things are setting it apart from the shade as we have done.
So let's get started but I'll actually not use this file this
time to create the new material but I'm going to start in
a completely new file because there are some things that you have
to keep in mind when you're working with volumetrics in particular.
So here I am in a new file, I just opened up the shader editor and change nothing else.
I'm just going to delete everything but the cube
that we are going to create the shader on
and for the environment set the background just to black.
So we have a united contrast for a fire
and in the view port I go into the material
preview and then the settings enable the scene world.
So it's actually black.
It's also to have a nice view here disable the floor and the axis.
So now everything is black and just to see what we are doing,
let's just add in a volumetric shader.
I just use the principle volume shader here
and right now there is no light source.
So we have to set up the emission so we actually see what happens,
Just turn the emission to one
And the density way down to 0.0 is everyone.
And as you can see we see our volume but it's not great quality.
So it's just the volume settings for Evie
but you have to be in the selection for the IV render engine
and then go down to the volumetrics panel
and there are a couple of settings that we can change
and all of them are quite important for the equality.
The most important part is actually to set the start
and the end parameter in a reasonable range here.
I just want to work on this fire very close up so I don't need to see it from
far away and that means I can just adjust this
end parameter to be very close to the camera,
let's say four m
but as you can see immediately gets much better in quality.
But also when I zoom out you can see that the end parameter here really
plays a role and just cuts off what we can see from the volume.
So maybe we have to choose something larger.
Let's just go for 10 m and then we shouldn't have a problem with this.
The starting m parameters can really play a
large role in optimizing the performance and quality
and additionally to that we have the tile size,
I'll keep this on four pixels for now
And the samples.
We have to see how the performance goes but this should be fine.
And because I'm going to create a fire for a simple fireplace animation.
I don't need any specific volumetric lighting or shadows from any other objects.
So now that the file is all set up to start working on the flame,
let's do just that and start by including some texture coordinates.
I want the shape of the fire to change with this cube.
So I'm just going to grab the generated foreign it's
and as you can already notice when we use the preview note,
it just connects it to the surface output.
If you want a preview for the volume,
we have to connect that to the emission color.
But still this is very difficult to actually see what the values are.
So there's no real great way to preview value maps and vector fields for a volume.
But we can work around that.
So let's just add a blob in the center. So we can already see what is going on.
And later on manipulate that into the shape of a flame.
I just grab
back to the mouth, nude,
subtract 0.5 in all dimensions
because now you have to keep in mind that we have to work with all three dimensions
because all the values are going to be relevant later on for the volume
and now that the factories are centered.
I scaled them
by two to make sure that in all directions of
the cube it goes from negative 12 positive one.
And then that the values are centered and normalized.
I just use the length operation and then invert this value
By subtracting it from one.
And as you can see now we have a nice sphere in the center of this cube
and the radius of this sphere is determined with this value.
Now it's already set this up to the kind of like a flame.
I just choose the emission colours, some something orange
like this.
And then use this actually as the emission strength
because when you overshoot the emission strength to something greater than one,
it will also change the color.
So if you just multiply this value by
hi factory
you can see that. It also changes the color
to have some control over this profile
allowed a RGB curves note in between
So we have a nice peak in the center
gradient to the edge.
Mhm.
Now it's already adding some detail into the shape
for that. I'll just use a fortnight texture
That he said to smooth of one.
Well now we can just take the same coordinate space
and then I want to add this
to the mask of the blob
to get some variation.
But now this is Overblowing everything a little bit. So
that's just before that subtract
another value
to add some more verticality to the shapes.
I'm going to add a vector math notes set to multiply.
First set it all to one so it doesn't change anything
and then adjust
how this shape is supposed to be
cranking down the zet factory
and up the other ones.
And this is already looking more vertical because
it is essentially stretched along the Z axis.
Now I want to add some variation to the pattern by introducing another noise texture
and then using the same old trick
with the mix. Rgb knows set to linear light
to destroy the coronets.
This is just going to add some more interest to the pattern.
Okay, this is all still looking like a blob though.
It's all very spherical
to change that. I want to warp the shape along the Z axis
to do that. I simply separate the components and put them back together
and for the component I just throw in. A math note is set to power
and as you can see by changing this exponent value here,
I can shift the weight of this blob.
But also the detailed pattern is staying in place.
That's because these are still using the regular generated
coordinates but I want to use an effect here
that makes the flames essentially stretch along the top
so they don't have the same pattern all over.
I want to do that because usually a flame
accelerates to the top
so it moves quicker and then that means that the flames
are going to be stretched on the top a little bit.
And to have this reflected in the pattern here.
I can simply use the East coast and also to create the
detail and now you can see that the whole thing is getting stretched
so it's finally add some movement to the flame and animated.
I just added a value node
and type in
hashtag frame
mhm
And that very easily and nicely gives me a
driver that always returns me the current frame.
And as I scrub through the timeline, you can see how the value always changes.
Let's just call this frame
and now we can use it to manipulate the shader to make it animated.
First I want to have some speed control
so I'm going to manipulate this time by dividing it
the way value
and this value now essentially controls how long it takes
for the output value here
to go from 0-1. For example, if I set this to 100,
It will take exactly 100 frames
Until the upward value here reaches one because the 100
frame is going to be divided by this value.
So it has a nice and easy way to think about this.
Let's just set it to 100 now we can still adjust the speed later on.
And the first thing I want to do for the animation,
it's just shifting this pattern along the Z axis because the flames are going
to move upwards so to do that I just manipulate the coordinate map.
Just adding a vector meth node set to subtract.
And the tricky part now is to find out where we have to subtract this vector.
If we subtract it all the way in front
then
everything is going to shift
even the overall shape
and that's not what we want.
We only wanted to be manipulating the actual detail
so instead I'm going to add it here.
So the top part that is making the general blob is still unaffected
and as you can see if I just shift this year
already get kind of like a nice fire animation going.
And there is also something interesting happening that I
pointed to before because of the fact that we
are stretching these coordinates in a way that they
are more elongated towards the top of the flame.
It also looks like the patron is moving faster on the top.
It even gets more obvious when I
change this exponents value
and that is exactly the effect that was aiming for.
So for this effect to work,
there's actually really important where the vector is added on top.
The important takeaway from this is that not only the time takes a
large role for the speed of something but especially also the distance.
So although I am changing this value here with the same speed everywhere
across the cube because of the fact that the coronets are warped,
it looks like the texture is moving upwards faster towards the top of the cube.
So now we just have to drive this vector
here with the animated component of the shader.
I'll just take a combined next ways Eno
and plug in the time parameter into the component.
And now you can see that we nicely have an animation.
It's quite slow at the moment though so
let's decrease this value to something like 40 and
now you can see that we have a nice animation when I scrub through the timeline,
here.
when you try to just play back the animation
you'll see that everything is a little bit blurry.
The reason for that is that he is trying to deny noise the image.
If you want to work around that you can just simply open up a new preview window.
But using the playback for volumetrics is not always
good anyways because it requires a lot of performance.
So usually to preview the actual time component of the animation of volumes,
you actually have to give it a preview render.
There won't be any blurring in the actual rendering to give the
animation some more interest there's one more thing I want to do,
I want the pageant to actually change over time as
well and not only shift from bottom to top.
So the easiest thing to do that is simply changing the dimension
of the noise textures that we are using
2 40
and then using the w parameter that is exposed then
to animate it as well.
So we are going to be both shifting and also animating the noise for that.
I just add another divide note to set a
different speed for this part of the animation.
I'm just going to set that 220
and then use this value to stick it into the W
parameter of the both the noises that we are using.
So if I now simply turn off the shifting.
So the only part of the animation is the W parameter.
You can see that it changes over time
but it is missing this very specific movement to the top. So let's turn that on again
and there we go.
That is the very basic fire shader,
fine tuning the starting and parameters of the volumetric settings even more.
We'll give you a much nicer preview frame rate as you can see here.
If you want something more realistic you can
for example change the smoothness of the warren.
Oy
and the detailed level of the noise.
But if you want something really realistic you're
probably not getting around doing actual simulation.
Of course there's also more that you can do with just the procedural method.
I just wanted to show you a quite simple to achieve. Example shader
as the chapter was also about drivers in general.
I want to extend these work for example for
another feature which is adding some wind into the mix
that looks like this and it can be controlled using this empty here.
So if you just rotated around
you can see that the direction of the wind also changes
and I can also adjust these the strength of the wind by changing the scale.
Okay, let's start adding the wind.
The way I'm planning this is to create an offset in the direction of the wind,
depending on the zet component.
For now for testing, I'm just going to shift
in a specified direction
using a vector meth node and the subtract operation.
And I'm going to do this for the whole of
the set up directly after using the initial current system.
So for now just change its value. Can see that the fire shifts
but I don't want a constant shift of the whole volume.
I just want to shift it
at the top. So I just duplicate this note and send it to scale.
And now I can select the direction of the offset with this vector here,
but I still have this
scale component to change how strong it is affected what I want to plug
into the scale now is a gradient going from the bottom to the top.
So I just take another texture chord note, fully generate coordinates
and separate the X. Y. Z. Components.
And for now just
plug these, that component into the scale
and as you can see this already kind of looks like what we are going for.
But right now this is just very linear.
I want to be able to have some more
control and introduce some more roundness to this transition.
So in between,
I also plug a RGB curves note.
And now as you can see, I can nicely adjust the profile
of how this is screwed,
I'll just go through something like this.
It gives me a little bit of a smoother transition
at the bottom and if I play the animation,
you can see that. It already kind of works
right now. It's just way too strong. So let's just tuned this down a little bit.
Mhm.
And now we're actually ready to introduce the empty object
for the control of the direction of the wind.
So let's add in an empty geologist choose the single arrow,
which is a nice indication of the direction.
And now we have to link this in the shader with some drivers.
What I want to get is the rotation of this empty.
So I'll just create an input for the rotation vector by using a combined X, Y Z node
and then at a driver
for this driver here,
I'll just keep it at what it is as an
expression which just references the variable that we can define
and for the variable
I choose as the object that empty that I just created
right now. This is marked as read So it does not work.
Let's just update the dependencies and as you can see now the error is resolved
But as the type I don't want the location but the rotation.
So just choose the exploitation for this. The rest we can just leave at auto oiler
and world space.
If you have some more complicated setups this can be quite tricky.
But here this will do just fine.
I just press update dependencies again,
that doesn't hurt.
And if I select the empty,
obviously the shader notary goes away because this empty doesn't have a material.
So to keep the interface visible here,
I'll just pinned as a window to the current material.
And now you can see if I change the irritation around. It also updates in the note.
Now I just copy this driver and pasted to the other components of this vector.
And then I have to obviously also change the type to the irritation.
And these that rotation.
Now I have a rotation vector for the three dimensional rotation of these empty.
And it's accessible in the shade of a tree.
Now we only have to convert this somehow in a directional vector.
The easiest way to do this is just using a vector rotate note
because what we have here is a oil rotation.
And if I just switch the factory type two oiler,
we can simply use
this vector here as the rotation vector.
But we also have to specify an input
and as the input, I just use the unit vector along the Z axis.
001.
Because this is the direction vector that it
has right now without any rotation applied,
it just points up along the Z axis.
So if I take this as the base fracture
and then apply the same rotation
that this object has.
I always receive the correct direction vector
and I can simply plug this
into the input of the scale
and it should already work the problem right now
is just that the wind is pointing straight up
and that can be a little bit of a problem.
So I just want to rotate this victory into the xy plane
and here we go. Now you can see
that it correctly references the direction depending on this. Empty.
But now I also want to be able to change the
strength of this wind with the scale of the empty.
I can simply do that by for example adding another scale node
to adjust the vector of the wind direction.
And now I can simply drive this scale factor.
We had another driver
which links
also to the empathy
and as the type I just choose the average scale.
But we have to be a little bit careful here
because the value of this scale factor is previously won
when creating the driver.
It also adjusted it to add one.
So I just want to delete this and only transfer over the actual scale
and as you can see
the strength of the wind is nicely bound to the scale of this. Empty
mm
oh
mm.